Let's have a look at some of the
most common technical patterns
that are used in the
architecture of microservices.
So first one is about communication.
Even though they are typically
deployed individually,
most microservices will
eventually have to interact with
each other through some sort
of a communications protocol.
And of course there will
be some external services,
that would occasionally have
to communicate as well.
Depending on an
application's requirements,
the communication implemented can be
either synchronous or asynchronous.
Synchronous communication is
very simple for us humans
to imagine and understand and is
based on a request response model.
In this model, the client simply
has to wait for a timely
response from a service.
Basic example is the communication
using a REST service over HTTP.
So in this case, if a passenger
smartphone makes a request to
the trip management microservice through
some sort of a REST in vacation,
that REST request ends up in
the trip management application,
which has to fulfill some information such
as obtain some customer information from
the passenger management
application so that one in turn
sends a cascaded REST request to the
passenger management application,
which has to respond.
And that amount of time that
the passenger management
application needs to
respond just simply adds
to the overall time
that the initial passenger has to wait
for the response to its
initial request arrives.
So the advantages of this approach
are that, it's easy to program,
it's easy to test.
It generally provides a
better real-time response
when everything is working okay.
And it's also commonly quite
firewall friendly because it uses
standard ports and has no need to use
an intermediate broker or some
other integration software.
If the services have known locations,
then it's quite easy to
implement the communication.
Now, this already falls into the
second disadvantage category.
So the one thing that
synchronous communication does is, it
supports only request
response style interaction.
If you need to inform
several downstream services of
something that had just happened,
if you need to fetch data from 3 or
4 catalogs before you can fulfill
a request, that will incrementally simply
add to the overall response time.
Additionally, you require
both the client and
the service to be available for the
entire duration of the exchange.
If the trip management
microservice is trying to get
the passenger information from
the passenger management
microservice and that one is down,
then it won't be able
to fulfill the request.
Similarly, the passengers smartphone,
when it sends a POST request to
the trip management application,
waits for the response and
if the connection is broken,
there is no easy way to retrieve, to resume from that point except
for creating another request which might
end up in duplicate
requests being processed.
So it's tricky at some points.
There are some thin ice areas that
we need to be careful about.
Also, the client needs to be able
to find their target service.
So if we look at it from the viewpoint of
the passengers smartphone in the
trip management application,
there needs to be some
well-known address where
the trip management
microservice can be reached
and is the same when we're cascading
the request down the stream.
So when a trip management
microservice needs to talk to the
passenger management microservice,
it needs to know where
to send that request,
what the host name is,
and what the port to use has to be.
In asynchronous based communication,
it is possible to use an intermediary,
which is sort of like a
message oriented middleware,
let's call it. AMQP
and MQTT protocols are
typical for these use cases.
And microservices can use message-
based patterns such as point-to-point,
publish-subscribe, request-
reply, request-a-notification patterns.
And the best advantage of asynchronous
communication is that it's
non-blocking and does not
require the client and the service
to be active at the same time.
So the client can just simply
continue making requests
without the need to wait for a response
because even when responses arrive,
they are typically identified using
some sort of a correlation ID.
So if you have an example workflow,
it's slightly different from the one
that we've been looking in
synchronous communication.
If the trip management application has to,
for example, register a new trip
with the dispatch application,
it simply sends an asynchronous
message through a broker,
which essentially stores that message
and relieves it from waiting,
from having to wait for an acknowledgment
on the dispatch side.
The message is safe in
store in the broker
and whenever the dispatcher
application is free to process it,
it will retrieve it
from the dispatcher and
from the broker and perform
its dispatch processing.
And let's say this involves the
sending a notification to a driver or
assigning a driver in the first place,
sending a confirmation
message to the passenger
that requested a ride, and of course,
confirming the ride had been arranged
with trip management application,
the dispatcher can actually use
a publish-subscribe channel to
send a single message to
more than 1 recipient
because these recipients
could have actually expressed
their desire to receive messages from
that publish-subscribe
channel ahead of time.
Which means that the broker, again,
which is in charge of receiving
the message from the dispatcher,
can store the message until each of
these 3 components comes up online
or if it's available immediately,
then it's just simply
delivered immediately.
But the broker can store messages until
component becomes active and deliver
them whenever that's appropriate.
The advantages of asynchronous
communication are clearly
that it's possible to decouple
the client from the service.
The client is unaware how
many dispatcher instances,
for example, there are.
It doesn't really even need to know
where the dispatcher is running.
And of course, because broker
is an intermediate component,
message buffering is immediately
available out of the box.
So the broker queues messages,
stores them safely whenever the
consumer is slow or unavailable,
and they will wait for the consumer
to be able to process them.
We also have the ability to implement
complex and flexible client
service interactions.
So the communication between
the clients and the service
need not be uninterrupted.
The client really doesn't
have to be available
to receive the messages from the service.
It can simply pop up at a
certain point in time and then
retrieve and process a batch
of messages if need be.
Of course, the disadvantages
are also rather clear.
We do have an additional
infrastructure component,
which is the broker that does
increase the operational complexity.
We need to make sure the
broker is highly available.
We need to secure it.
Somebody needs to deploy and configure it.
And of course, request
response based interactions
are quite difficult to implement
because we need to make sure there is
a correlation identifier
and the reply channel
that is expected for each request for
the response to be, to be received.
Microservice based
applications, in that they
do have external dependencies.
They can still fail.
And failure can happen either in
an individual service or
even in a chain of services
if it's not handled correctly
at the point of origin.
If one service in the
dependency chain fails,
then generally the upstream clients
must either implement some sort of
fault tolerance or will end up
experiencing a cascaded fader.
Several different approaches
to working towards for tolerance
but generally we focus on 5 topics.
First of all,
when is the request taking
too long to be serviced?
So it might be that the service we
are talking about is quite resilient,
can wait for minutes at a
time to receive responses.
But in synchronous communication that
is often blocking other processes.
So there has to be a limit
on the amount of time that
the client of the services prepared
to wait for a response.
However,
most failures are not
terminal and persistent.
They're transient failures,
so chances are that if we have
failed in an initial request,
we might actually have more
success if we retry after a while.
And retries are a fairly important thing
to bear in mind when configuring
resilience on the client side,
of course, just like time-outs.
Especially in the area of how
often and how quickly to repeat an
operation if it has previously failed.
We need to be able to
defer subsequent retries,
but defer them only again up to
a point where they become a
disruption in themselves.
So has to be some sort of
an incremental delay increase.
But there also has to be a maximum
amount of time we're prepared to wait,
maximum number of attempts
we're prepared to make before
actually gracefully responding with
unavailability of service
response or something like that.
Fallback is another category
which allows us to very gracefully
handle downstream failures.
If a failure happens in the
dependency we're trying to use,
that does not necessarily
mean we have to fail.
We may have some cached responses,
cached data that might not
be a 100 percent up to date,
but good enough to work with.
We may have alternative responses,
such as a simple apology,
let's say,
recipe ratings are
currently unavailable. Like for
a cookbook which allows customers
to rate the recipes or whichever.
So, it's possible, using fallbacks
to handle failures somewhere in the
downstream infrastructure quite
gracefully and prevent
cascading failures by
simply providing some sort
of an alternative response.
The 2 most powerful and to a degree
also popular topics are the
circuit breaker and the bulkhead.
And the circuit breaker, which
are about to have a look at
next, is a pattern that allows us to
avoid repeating the request
to a service that we know
to be unavailable anyway.
There are several parameters which
we are going to have a look at,
as I said immediately afterwards.
But essentially, while the circuit
breaker is normally in a closed circuit state,
if a downstream service fails,
we can temporarily break the circuit,
prevent from any requests for being
sent to that downstream service.
And then carefully try to
close the circuit once
more to see if the situation has
improved. It has two important side effects,
first of all, a request we are
sending to the failing service which
are going to be failed anyway,
do not overload, do not present
any additional load to the service
which is in trouble to begin with.
And second of all, by combining an
open-circuit with a fallback response,
we can promptly return response that
make some sense to the client
and we don't even have to request
anything from the failing service.
Bulkheads are generally used
for downstream services,
we know that have a limited
capacity to process requests.
Sometimes they're called
connection pools as well.
It is basically simply a maximum amount of
pending requests going downstream to
a particular service alongside
request queue mostly
and this allows us to just like is
the concept of database
connection pools allows us to,
first of all, diminish the stress
on the downstream service.
And if ensuring that downstream service
can process request quickly enough,
actually improve the overall
throughput and use less connections,
concurrent connections at the same time.
It's something that we're also
going to look at right now.
So first the circuit breaker.
So the circuit breaker is actually
a very powerful approach to an
unstable downstream service.
Because whenever everything is normal
and the calls to downstream
service are succeeding,
and it is a client approach,
of course, the circuit breaker is
in what we call a closed state.
In a closed state,
request go out is normal.
We wait for the response,
return the response or
process the results
and that's that.
Now, whenever a specific
number of failures,
either timeouts or errors returned by
the downstream service is reached,
and this is all configurable,
the circuit breaker opens,
which means any subsequent request to
the downstream service
will immediately fail.
We won't have to wait for a response,
won't have to wait for a timeout,
we just don't use that service anymore
for a configurable amount of time.
Now, after that configurable
amount of time,
the circuit breaker moves
to a half-open state,
which means that we just simply execute
downstream service calls every now and
then to see if it's working or not.
And if the service
proves to be healthy again,
we're getting close the circuit
and start working with it
normally.
Bulkhead as opposed to circuit
breaker does not react to failures,
but instead tries to prevent
the failures by limiting
the amount of load we are
imposing on a downstream service.
So it means basically that we allow up
to a specific amount of pending requests.
So requests that our client has
sent to a downstream service,
typically on behalf of others,
on behalf of application users
and when that limit is reached,
any additional requests
are placed into a queue.
If that queue fills up,
then both of them are configurable,
so both the concurrent pending
requests and the size of the queue.
If the queue fills up,
then any additional requests are
rejected, failed immediately.
Then of course, as pending requests
complete, request from
the queue are added to
the active communications
queue or to the active group,
and so on and so forth until
hopefully we've cleared the queue and
everybody has gotten a
successful response.
It is common need to combine the bulkhead
pattern with timeouts, of course.
And as in the case of both
circuit breaker and bulkhead,
it's common to combine them with failover
responses or fallback responses.
There are several different fault
tolerance implementations available.
Quarkus relies on the
SmallRye implementation,
which in turn is an implementation of
the Eclipse Microprofile
Fault Tolerance specification.
Microprofile
Fault Tolerance was originally based on Hystrix.
But it's true power is that it allows you,
if you're programming in Java,
to use simple annotation
driven fault tolerance features
in Java microservices.
So it's not a matter of coding things,
Hystrix used to be quite
difficult to use because it did
require you to code a lot of
the functionality manually.
Microprofile Fault
Tolerance specification
actually moves that to
annotation based approach,
which is obviously much easier to
add on even as an afterthought,
but at least you're not making
the non-functional specification
part of your business logic.
There are obviously other implementations,
as we said, Hystrix,
Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh is one
and of course it's upstream
project Istio is as well,
and they provide fault tolerance at
a network communications level
globally throughout let's say
an OpenShift Container Platform cluster.
There is a circuit breaker
component, for example,
for Vert.x, there's a
Camel Fault Tolerance EIP,
and there's an Apache Commons
Circuit Breaker interface
and various implementations. In monolithic applications,
tracing a single user's
interaction with the system
can actually be debugged quite easily.
You simply attach a debugger
to the application.
You see where the request comes in,
and then you can simply trace
the path of that request
throughout the application by using
a debugger step functionality.
With microservices that's
much more complex.
You need to be able to tell with
precision and certainty which of
the microservices were involved in the
processing of an end user's request.
But that cannot be done by
attaching a simple
debugger to an instance of,
let's say, Java virtual machine.
We need to be able to trace the path of
the request using some
sort of a network tagging
but it shouldn't be that
low level network tagging
functionality that we can
do in network engineering.
It should be some high level tags
that they're easy to aggregate,
they are easy to process.
And distributed tracing is a tool that
actually provides us with the ability to
do this by using simple request headers
and then number of collector tools
that aggregate the data for storage,
reporting and visualization.
And Jaeger is one of such tools along
with traffic that allows us for
Visualization analysis.
Now every request in tracing
gets a unique request ID.
And then as requests are passed down
to downstream services, spans are created.
So service A, invoking
service B in turn invoking
service C and then returning
the information back to the origin
would basically constitute 2
spans within a single trace.
1 span is A to B
and B to A communication
and that span will include the B to
C and C to B communication
because that happens in sequence.
And the OpenTracing API is actually
vendor-neutral standard for
tracing and is implemented by
several applications in various
different languages such as Java,
JavaScript, Go and so on.
And the implementations can be
as varying as Zipkin from Twitter,
Jaeger from Uber, or even Hawkular
APM from Red Hat.
Of course, it's also very
important to be able to
tell the performance indicators for
the application at any moment in time.
And that's commonly achieved by
adding metrics to a microservice.
Again, metrics can range from
simple number of requests
having been processed so far,
to various response times trackings,
to the amount of memory
used to response ratios.
We can actually use those
metrics with a great degree
of success to implement
performance optimizations,
in day 2 operations.
They also detect us to pre-empt failures,
to detect indications
of imminent failures through
various performance indicators
and of course, act ahead
of time proactively.
Several tools such as
Prometheus and Grafana exists
that gather metrics and provide
visualization tools and
microservice based applications
also have the benefit of
being able to use various
implementations of metrics,
exposing frameworks such as the Eclipse
microprofile metrics specification.
Ultimately, maintaining
identity and access
controlled throughout a series of
independent services is
sometimes a real challenge.
Fortunately, we have a number of
solutions such as single sign-on,
which is a common approach for
authentication authorization
using permitting a client to
use a single set of logging
credentials to access
multiple services which then
simply verify an access token.
One of them is also the
distribution of sessions,
so distributing identity
between microservices and
the entire system whereby microservices
can contact single resilient
highly available cache system,
for example, a data grid
where they can inquire
about the state of a particular session.
Client-side tokens are also an
interesting great solution to this issue.
Token being signed by an
authentication service and then
simply being passed along side
which each and every request,
such that the microservice
that receives the request and
receives the token can validate it without
invoking the issuer, the
authentication service.
JSON Web Token is an example
of such authentication.
And then also client-side
tokens with API gateways,
whereby the client-side token is
validated by the API gateway itself.
These are all very common approaches
and we will see a couple of these,
a couple of all of these
that we've discussed in
this section in the
remainder of this course.
So head on to the quiz that's
coming up and then join us in
the first exercise of this course where
we validate OpenShift credentials.